== Introduction to Metadata
include::./includes/attributes.asciidoc[]

=== July 2018

Return
to{nbsp}https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1037-uk-gemini-standard-and-inspire-implementing-rules[GEMINI
2.3 home page]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#Intro[1.
Introduction]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#fundamentals[2.
Fundamentals of Metadata]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#2.1[2.1
The nature of metadata]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#2.2[2.2
Metadata services]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#2.3[2.3
Metadata as a business process]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#2.4[2.4
Metadata roles]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#2.5[2.5
Metadata standards]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#principles[3.
General principles of Metadata]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#3.1[3.1
Introduction]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#3.2[3.2
Free text]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#3.3[3.3
Obligation]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#3.4[3.4
Element domains]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#3.5[3.5
Spatial references]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#3.6[3.6
Date fields]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#scope[4.
Data resources in Scope]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#4.1[4.1
What is stated in UK GEMINI2]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#4.2[4.2
Characteristics of data resources in scope]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#4.3[4.3
Applicability of UK GEMINI2]

https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1052-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-1#4.4[4.4
Levels of data resources for documentation]

=== Preface

These guidelines cover the basics of metadata for geospatial data
resources and services. They are intended for general use in the UK
geographic information environment and serve as a preamble to the more
detailed and specific
guidelines{nbsp}https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1049-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-2[Metadata
Guidelines for Geospatial Data Resources - Part 2]. They are primarily
concerned with geospatial data (i.e. that which references data to a
location on the surface of the Earth), and which has a limited
geographic extent (i.e. is restricted to a defined territory). Services
which provide access to such data are also in scope. The Guidelines have
been developed within the context of the capture and maintenance of
metadata for INSPIRE using the UK’s interpretation of the INSPIRE
implementing rules, referred to as UK GEMINI2. However, they are
sufficiently broadly based to be applicable in a wider context of
geospatial metadata creation and management.

The Guidelines are aimed at data managers and creators of metadata,
providers of metadata services and general data users. They include some
guidance on quality management such that they could be used in the
context of a national metadata service. A UK discovery metadata service
forms part of data.gov.uk. As well as the human usable portal, this has
a machine readable OGC “Catalogue Services for the Web” interface
(http://csw.data.gov.uk/geonetwork/srv/en/csw?service=CSW&version=2.0.2&request=GetCapabilities[OGC
Capabilities document link]).

The Guidelines have been revised during 2018 in the light of other
developments, including revisions to UK GEMINI2. Any comments on these
Guidelines or on UK GEMINI2 should be sent
to{nbsp}gemini@agi.org.uk.

=== [#Intro]####1.{nbsp} Introduction

These guidelines for the creation, maintenance and quality management of
metadata for geospatial data resources, including the services which
provide access to the resources, provide a general introduction to the
principles and concepts of metadata. They are aimed at data managers and
creators of metadata, providers of metadata services and general data
users.

The data resources may be datasets, dataset series, services delivering
geographic data, or any other information resource with a geospatial
content. This includes datasets that relate to a limited geographic
area. The data resources may be graphical or textual (tabular or free
text), hardcopy or digital. Geospatial data is data containing a
positional or locational element relative to the Earth. Many data
resources that at first sight do not appear to be geospatial
nevertheless do have a geospatial component, in that they apply to a
limited geographic area, for example statistics for a local authority
area. Geospatial data contains spatial references which may take the
form of coordinates, for example in latitude and longitude, or
references to geographic place names, for example street data.

Metadata is data about data. It provides additional information about
the data resource, to enable it to be better understood and used to good
effect.

In an organisation, metadata is required for both internal and external
purposes. It can add significantly to the value of an organisation’s
data holdings, and failure to create it at the appropriate time can lead
to greater hidden costs later. Lack of knowledge about available data
can lead to costly duplication of effort.

Within an organisation, metadata is required to organise and maintain
the internal investment in data. As staff change, institutional
knowledge leaves the organisation. Undocumented data can lose its value.
Subsequent staff may have little understanding of the contents and use
of the data and may find that they cannot trust results generated using
this data.

Externally, metadata is required to provide information about an
organisation’s data holdings and data access services. Data resources
are a major national asset, and information of what data resources exist
within different organisations, particularly in the public sector, is
required to improve efficiencies and reduce data duplication. Data
catalogues and data discovery services enable potential users to find,
evaluate and use that data, thereby increasing its value. In addition,
data received from an external source requires further information,
supplied by metadata, to process and interpret it.

The requirements for metadata for internal and external purposes are
different. Metadata for external purposes will be at a general level,
providing basic information about the data resources. Having this in a
standardised form enables metadata services to be set up for widespread
use. Standardisation of this aspect is thus important, and most metadata
standards are designed for this purpose. Metadata for internal purposes
will be much more detailed. Internal standards for metadata will
generally be extensions of those required for external purposes, and
often will contain items particular to the organisation or business
sector. Whilst the details of these Guidelines relate to external
metadata, and in particular the UK GEMINI2 metadata set designed for
discovery metadata services, the principles are equally applicable to
internal metadata.

A glossary of terms is provided
in{nbsp}https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1056-glossary[here].

=== [#fundamentals]####2.{nbsp} Fundamentals of metadata

==== *_[#2.1]####2.1 The nature of metadata_*

There are a range of uses for metadata, for discovery, for evaluation
and for use:

* *discovery*: the user aims to find out what resources are available
and whether these are able to satisfy their requirements. This is
typically what a search engine can process, using basic search criteria
to identify the available resources corresponding to the user
requirements, and providing to the user basic metadata (name, content
description, geographic area of applicability etc.) about the candidate
resources.
* *evaluation*: the user needs to go deeper in the metadata (e.g.
looking at the quality of the information) to ascertain whether a
candidate resource is fit for the intended purpose.
* *use*: the user has selected a candidate resource, but needs to access
it and to configure a system or software to process it.

==== *_[#2.2]####2.2 Metadata services_*

Metadata services provide one of the fundamental parts of a Spatial Data
Infrastructure (SDI). They are used within organisations as part of the
information management facilities, and on a national basis for discovery
purposes. Essentially, they work on the basis of a user defining
parameters such as Topic Category and Extent, to carry out a search to
discover data resources that might be suitable and return information
about their source, content and availability.

==== *_[#2.3]####2.3 Metadata as a business process_*

A simple process model is presented at Figure 1 and shows the flow from
metadata creation through to metadata query with quality related
processes built-in. It can represent the processes within one
organisation or split between separate organisations. The flow is
idealised and could relate to any discovery-level metadata service.

Although metadata creation and maintenance are shown as separate
operations, it cannot be over-emphasised that they will be far more
successful if they are fully integrated into the other business
processes of an organisation. Thus, when a dataset or other form of data
resource is produced, it should be routinely documented as metadata as
part of the production or distribution process. Further, when the data
resource is updated or subject to some form of change, the metadata
should also be updated.

image:https://www.agi.org.uk/images/xslt/Model_metadata_creation.jpg[Simple
Process model for metadata creation, maintenance, service provision and
use,width=1114,height=483]

If the main purpose of creating metadata is to document and enable
discovery of an organisation’s own data resources and the exposure of
all or part of that metadata to some external service is secondary, then
there will be far greater chance of support and resources for metadata
in the business.

However, if metadata is seen as an additional activity to support some
external service, it is likely to be ignored or forgotten. When it is
finally picked up, it may well be assigned to someone who has no
knowledge of the data resource and no interest in the quality of the
metadata.

==== *_[#2.4]####2.4 Metadata roles_*

Three generic roles in the metadata process can be recognised, these are
illustrated above:

* *Metadata creator*{nbsp}– responsible for creating and maintaining the
metadata and for its quality. Although the metadata creator is usually
the data producer or distributor, this is not always so.
* *Service provider{nbsp}*– runs the metadata service, and may be part of the
same organisation as the metadata creator or quite separate. A broad
view of the role is taken here which may be made up of several actual
roles in the real world - for example:
** a contractor hosting the service and providing IT support who is
contracted to
** a service owner who is ultimately responsible for the quality of the
service and has service level agreements (SLAs) with the contractor and
metadata creators.

* *Service user{nbsp}*- the consumer of the service who selects the search
criteria matching their requirements, performs the searches and finds
data resources meeting their requirements or, at least, meriting further
investigation.

==== *_[#2.5]####2.5 Metadata standards_*

There are many metadata standards in existence. These have been produced
at different times by different bodies for different purposes. The main
ones that are relevant to geospatial data resources are:

* **ISO 19115**

This describes all aspects of geospatial metadata and provides a
comprehensive set of metadata elements. It is designed for electronic
metadata services, and the elements are designed to be searchable
wherever possible. It is widely used as the basis for geospatial
metadata services. However, because of the large number of metadata
elements and the complexity of its data model, it is difficult to
implement.

* **INSPIRE**

The INSPIRE metadata Implementing Rules defines the minimum set of
metadata elements necessary to comply with the INSPIRE Directive. In
essence it is a profile of ISO 19115 for discovery purposes. It allows a
variety of possible implementations.

* **UK{nbsp}GEMINI**

The UK Geospatial Metadata Interoperability Initiative (GEMINI) was
produced originally through a collaboration between the Association for
Geographic Information (AGI), the e-Government Unit (eGU) and the UK
Data Archive. In a subsequent revision, it was made compatible with the
core elements of ISO 19115. In its current version it is conformant with
the INSPIRE Implementing Rules and Technical Guidance for metadata, and
designed to meet the requirements of INSPIRE in a UK context. This
latest revision has been sponsored by Defra and managed by AGI. UK
GEMINI remains an AGI publication.

In common with INSPIRE, UK GEMINI remains an implementation of ISO
19115:2005, not the more recent version ISO 19115-1:2014.

* **Dublin{nbsp}Core**

This was originally developed by librarians for cataloguing information
resources. It uses free-text fields, which makes automatic searching
difficult. Consequently, it not ideally suited for discovery purposes
using electronic data services. It is severely limited in its ability to
handle the geospatial aspects of data, and also in how it handles the
geographic extent of non-geographic data, e.g. data that applies to one
country or region rather than another.

However, Dublin Core provides the basic vocabulary used in W3C’s Data
Catalogue Vocabulary (DCAT), on which the European Commission has based
their GeoDCAT Application Profile.

At present, GEMINI makes no direct use of DCAT or GeoDCAT, but it does
share some of the Dublin Core vocabulary.

Formal references for these standards and implementing rules are given
in
the{nbsp}https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1047-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-3[Bibliography].

=== [#principles]####3.{nbsp} General principles of metadata

==== *_[#3.1]####3.1 Introduction_*

This section describes some general high-level rules that apply to the
creation of metadata. Whilst primarily applying to UK GEMINI2, they are
also relevant to other metadata specifications.

==== *_[#3.2]####3.2 Free text_*

The aim of a discovery metadata such as specified in UK GEMINI2 is to
define metadata in a form that provides easily understood information
for potential users of the data resource, and is searchable in a
computerised discovery metadata service such as
the{nbsp}http://inspire-geoportal.ec.europa.eu/[INSPIRE Geoportal]. It is
difficult to carry out searches on free text, since the same thing can
be written in different ways, for example “OS”, “Ordnance Survey”, “The
Ordnance Survey of Great Britain”, “OSGB”. Hence, free text entries are
discouraged where the metadata is searchable. Where only a limited
number of options is available, code lists are specified. For some
metadata elements, such as Topic, these may not correspond exactly to
the theme of the dataset, and the nearest option should be chosen. Where
code lists are used, input and output facilities in a metadata service
should identify the corresponding element value.

==== *_[#3.3]####3.3 Obligation_*

As with other data specifications, elements in UK GEMINI2 are given as
mandatory, conditional or optional. Mandatory elements must be
completed, and most software tools do not allow the metadata to be
published if any mandatory elements are missing. Conditional elements
have a condition associated with them, and should be supplied when that
condition is fulfilled. Such conditions usually define the applicability
of the element. Optional elements need not always be completed. This can
be for several reasons, for example if the element is not relevant or
its value is not known. In practice, optional elements are conditional,
and there is a set of circumstances in which a value should be given,
roughly corresponding to “is it relevant?” and “is its value known?”
Optional elements should not be ignored.

==== *_[#3.4]####3.4 Element domains_*

Each metadata element has a range of allowable values, called its
domain. These may be values in a given range (e.g. positive integers) or
a set of code values chosen from a list. Specifying the domain helps
with both the initial creation of data and quality checking [For further
details on quality checking,
see{nbsp}https://www.agi.org.uk/40-gemini/1047-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-3[Part
3{nbsp}]of these Guidelines]. In some cases, default values may be used, for
example for elements relating to the metadata itself.

==== *_[#3.5]####3.5 Spatial references_*

By definition, geographic data contains some form of spatial reference.
The spatial reference identifies the position of the object of interest
in the real world. Spatial references can be given in a number of forms,
not just as Grid References. They can take the form of the name or
identifier of a geographic location which can be described in a
gazetteer. Examples are property addresses, postcodes and census areas.
These spatial references are a key means of searching the data by
location, not only within the data resource, but also positioning the
data resource in the world (e.g. data for Scotland). A consistent set of
spatial references enables spatial searches to be made for datasets in a
metadata service.

==== *_[#3.6]####3.6 Date fields_*

Metadata can contain a multitude of dates identifying the different
stages in the life cycle of the data. Key dates are included in
metadata. To enable searches to be carried out (e.g. date relating to
the period 1990 to 1999), these dates need to be recorded in
standardised form. Unfortunately, different standards are used in
different places. Here it is recommended that the extended format
defined in{nbsp}https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html[ISO
8601]{nbsp}(YYYY-MM-DD) is used.

=== [#scope]####4.{nbsp} Data resources in scope

==== *_[#4.1]####4.1 What is stated in{nbsp}__UK GEMINI2_*

The purpose of this section is to provide guidance on

{empty}(i) what types of geospatial data can be documented using UK
GEMINI2,

{empty}(ii) the applicability of UK GEMINI2 and

{empty}(iii) how to find an appropriate level for the individual
documentation of data resources.

UK GEMINI2 “specifies a set of metadata elements for describing
geographic data resources” but provides no other information about what
types of data or services are in or out of scope.

In practice it can be difficult to decide what data or service resources
are in scope and how they should be documented. For example, what
constitutes a suitable body of data for individual documentation? Should
it be an individual map or the whole map series?

There is no simple answer to these questions; it is likely to be a
compromise. However, some general guidance can be given.

==== *_[#4.2]####4.2 Characteristics of data resources in scope_*

The general nature of geospatial data and access services is described
in the Introduction. As is emphasised there, many data resources that at
first sight do not appear to be geospatial nevertheless have a
geospatial component. They are geographically constrained in some way,
in that the data only refers to certain areas or locations on the
surface of the Earth, whether on land or sea. The way that these
locations are referenced can take many forms such as coordinates (e.g.
latitude and longitude, National Grid), or geographic place names (e.g.
street, locality, town, administrative area).

Although it is common to think of geospatial data as being synonymous
with maps, this is far from the case. Geospatial data can equally well
be textual - whether tabular or free text – or images taken from the air
or from the ground. The data can be as hardcopy or in digital or even
video form.

All these types can be documented using UK GEMINI2.

==== *_[#4.3]####4.3 Applicability of{nbsp}__UK GEMINI2_*

The primary purpose of UK GEMINI2 is to provide the requirements for
documenting data resources within the United Kingdom that conforms with
the INSPIRE Metadata Implementing Rules.

==== *_[#4.4]####4.4 Levels of data resources for documentation_*

There are no absolute rules for deciding on an appropriate level for the
individual documentation of a data resource. The overriding
consideration is that the data resource has been documented with
sufficient granularity to yield a useful result if discovered using a
metadata service. Too coarse a granularity will result in too
generalised a result, too fine a granularity is likely to overwhelm the
user (and the metadata creator!). The granularity can relate to
geographical extent, temporal extent or subject.

There are some questions that can be posed which may help the metadata
creator to find an answer.

* How is the data resource used and how is it made available? Is it a
product, dataset, document that may be used and combined with other
datasets or is it an integral part of a larger data resource?
* Has the data resource been captured using a single data specification?
Are there other data resources captured using the same data
specification?
* Is the data resource part of a time series? Is the data resource
covering the same extent periodically updated to the same specification?
* Does the data resource relate to, or reference, a continuous area or
contiguous areas, or does it reference specific locations?
* Does the data resource relate to one or many subjects, topics or
themes?

An approach to resolving these questions is found in the{nbsp}table below.

The key points are:

* Finding the appropriate level will be a compromise between what
appears to be fit for purpose for the user and the granularity which can
be supported by the metadata creator.
* If the metadata creator has to aggregate what is documented for
practical reasons then they should ensure that the resource is
adequately documented in terms of Extent, Dataset reference date and
Topic category. There should also an Additional Information Source
included so that the service user can understand the finer granularity
lying behind the single entry.

[width="100%",cols="34%,33%,33%",]
|===
|*Nature of data resource* |*How to document* |*Examples*

a|
*Stand-alone product or identifiable dataset or document*

. not part of a series produced to the same specification; and
. not part of a time series.

a|
Individually with one metadata record.

*Notes:*

* If the data resource references a number of separate locations then at
least ensure that this is reflected in a multiple entry for Extent.
* If the data resource covers a number of topics or subjects then ensure
that each of these is reflected, using multiple entries for Topic
category and Keyword.

a|
* Stand-alone soil map of the New Forest.
* One-off report on a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
* Historical index of streets in Cambridge.
* One-off table of statistics for Oxfordshire.

a|
*Products or identifiable datasets or documents forming a series with a
common specification*;

. referencing one location or contiguous area; and
. may be part of a time series.

a|
Together with one metadata record.

*Notes:*

* If the time series is not regular with periodic updates, consider
documenting by individual dates or durations referring to particular
periods of update.
* If the data resource covers a number of topics or subjects then ensure
that each of these is reflected, using multiple entries for Topic
category and Keyword.

a|
* Unrevised geological map series of all of Scotland.
* Topographic map series covering all of GB updated periodically.
* Series of statistical reports on the crime by ward in Surrey for 1973.
* Street gazetteer of Hampshire.

a|
*Products or identifiable datasets or documents forming a series with a
common specification*;

. referencing more than one discrete location or contiguous area; and
. may be part of a time series.

a|
Each location or area individually with a metadata record.

*Notes:*

* If the time series is not regular with periodic updates, consider
documenting by individual dates or durations referring to a particular
period of update.
* If the data resource covers a number of topics or subjects then ensure
that each of these is reflected, using multiple entries for Topic
category and Keyword.
* If it is not feasible to individually document each location or
contiguous area, e.g. borehole records or Sites of Special Scientific
Interest, then at least ensure that is reflected in a multiple entry for
Extent. Also include Additional Information Source.

a|
* Geological map series of different parts of Great Britain – document
each part separately.
* Topographic maps of National Parks – document each Park separately.
* Aerial photography of parts of Devon, Cornwall and Somerset taken in
1957 and not re-flown to same specification – document each part
separately.
* Statistical tables for metropolitan areas in UK – document separately
if feasible.

|===

_{nbsp}Last updated: July 2018_

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/[image:https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png[Creative
Commons Licence]] +
This work is licensed under
a{nbsp}http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/[Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License]
