== Common Metadata Errors UK Location Discovery Metadata Service
include::./includes/attributes.asciidoc[]

Return
to{nbsp}https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1037-uk-gemini-standard-and-inspire-implementing-rules[GEMINI
2.3 home page]

https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1053-common-metadata-errors-uk-location-discovery-metadata-service#Intro[1.
Introduction]

https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1053-common-metadata-errors-uk-location-discovery-metadata-service#schema_errors[2.
Schema errors]

https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1053-common-metadata-errors-uk-location-discovery-metadata-service#ISO_errors[3.
ISO 19139 Schematron errors]

https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1053-common-metadata-errors-uk-location-discovery-metadata-service#proc_errors[4.
Processing Errors]

https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1053-common-metadata-errors-uk-location-discovery-metadata-service#inspire_warnings[5.
European INSPIRE Geoportal errors and warnings]

https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1053-common-metadata-errors-uk-location-discovery-metadata-service#soft_errors[6.
"Soft" errors]

https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1053-common-metadata-errors-uk-location-discovery-metadata-service#winner[7.
And the winner?]

=== [#Intro]####1. Introduction

The UK Location Discovery Metadata Service (DMS) lies at the heart of UK
Location and the delivery of the UK Location Strategy and INSPIRE - 'to
know what data we have'.

The DMS operates by collecting valid metadata records from data
publishers and making them available on data.gov.uk, and for further
collection to the European INSPIRE Geoportal.

==== 1.1 Target Audience

The primary audience for this document are those responsible for
creating and maintaining metadata records, located within data provider
organisations, and their technical partners.

==== 1.2 Background

This document is largely based on an analysis of validation failures
when metadata validation was first run on the records that had already
been collected into{nbsp}https://data.gov.uk/[data.gov.uk]. Approximately
half the records present in data.gov.uk at that time initially failed.

==== 1.3 Assumed Knowledge

This guide assumes that the reader is familiar with the creation and
management of metadata and has read the{nbsp}UK Location “Getting Started'
series of
guides{nbsp}[https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1047-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-3[27]],
and the DMS Operational Guide.

Readers requiring an introduction to discovery metadata for geospatial
data resources are referred to the UK GEMINI guide “Metadata Guidelines
for Geospatial Data Resources, Introduction – Part 1”
[https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1047-metadata-guidelines-for-geospatial-data-resources-part-3[1]].

Other useful reading includes AGI’s Guidelines for UK GEMINI Part 3
Metadata Quality

*GEMINI 2.3 note: the DMS Operational Guide, UK GEMINI Encoding Guidance
and AGI's Guidelines - Part 2 have all been consolidated into this
content. +
*

==== 1.4 Where to Obtain More Information

The latest information, and additional resources, can be obtained by
visiting the{nbsp}UK Location{nbsp}web site.

If you would like to contact the UK Location Coordination Unit, contact
details are at{nbsp}http://data.gov.uk/location/contact_points

==== 1.5 Validation

==== GEMINI 2.3

There is no currently no validation tool for GEMINI 2.3, but some
software companies are developing tools. {nbsp}To validate a metadata record
in your own software you should:

* Validate using the ISO 19139 (APISO) schemas.
{nbsp}(http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/draft-schemas/inspire-md-schemas/apiso-inspire/apiso-inspire.xsd[http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/draft-schemas/inspire-md-schemas/apiso-inspire/apiso-inspire.xsd])

It doesn't matter which order validation is done in, but to be valid,
records must validate against both the APISO schema and the GEMINI 2.3
Schematron.

In addition a second (supplemental) schematron is provided to test for
recommendations in your metadata structure.

==== GEMINI 2.2 and data.gov.uk

Currently, validating a UK Location metadata (GEMINI 2.2) record is a
three stage process:

* First, a metadata set is validated against the ISO 19139 schemas. UK
Location / data.gov.uk use the XSD files provided by EDEN;
see{nbsp}https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1048-uk-gemini-encoding-guidance[_UK
GEMINI Encoding Guidance{nbsp}_]for details.
* If the metadata set proves to be schema valid, it is then validated
against the ISO 19139 Table A.1 Constraints Schematron schema. The
Schematron schema relies on hardcoded XPath statements which will only
work effectively on a schema valid XML set.
* Finally, if the XML is still valid it is validated against the GEMINI2
Profile Schematron schema.

Any failure of this validation is logged for attention by the
administrator of the harvest source. The record is loaded into
data.gov.uk, assuming it passes a very minimal subset.

This is expected to change before late 2019, to only accept GEMINI 2.3
records.

==== European INSPIRE Geoportal

The European INSPIRE Geoportal carries out its own validation. This uses
basically the same rules. No records are rejected, but errors are
reported,
at{nbsp}https://inspire-geoportal.ec.europa.eu/proxybrowser/[inspire-geoportal.ec.europa.eu/proxybrowser/.]

==== Warnings, soft errors, recommendations

Even where the metadata is valid, there can be 'soft errors', where the
metadata may be misleading.

With GEMINI 2.3,{nbsp}a second (supplemental) schematron is provided to test
for recommendations.

=== [#schema_errors]####2. Schema errors

==== 2.1 Confusion of Date and DateTime

In ISO 19115, Date and DateTime are distinct types. Although in many
elements, either is allowed, the XML encoding needs to be explicit about
which is given. It is an error to put a date (such as 2010-05-12) in a
DateTime element.

Example of invalid structure:

`<gmd:dateStamp>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gco:DateTime>2012-11-15</gco:DateTime>`

`</gmd:dateStamp>`

Examples of valid structure:

This should either include the time, e.g.

`<gmd:dateStamp>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gco:DateTime>2012-11-15T13:50:38</gco:DateTime>`

`</gmd:dateStamp>`

Or be explicit that it doesn’t:

`<gmd:dateStamp>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gco:Date>2012-11-15</gco:Date>`

`</gmd:dateStamp>`

==== 2.2 Elements in the wrong order

Although there is no “logical” ordering of the elements in ISO 19115,
INSPIRE, or GEMINI, the XML pattern adopted by ISO 19139 means that the
elements must appear in the correct order. The order enforced is the
order the elements appear in ISO 19115; the GEMINI Encoding Guidance
contains an appendix giving the correct order for the subset of elements
used by GEMINI.

The example found contained the ISO 19115 metadata characterSet element
before the metadata language element.

=== [#ISO_errors]####3. ISO 19139 Schematron errors

See
also{nbsp}https://www.agi.org.uk/gemini/40-gemini/1053-common-metadata-errors-uk-location-discovery-metadata-service#soft_errors[“Empty
strings”].

==== 3.1 No level description

ISO 19115 requires that a “level description” is given for any quality
statement that is not describing the “dataset” or “series” level.
INSPIRE and GEMINI use the quality statement for both lineage and
conformity. This means that any “service” record must provide a
gmd:DQ_Scope/gmd:levelDescription element, such as:

`<gmd:DQ_Scope>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gmd:level>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gmd:MD_ScopeCode codeList="http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/ISO_19139_Schemas/resources/codelist/gmxCodelists.xml#MD_ScopeCode" codeListValue="service">service</gmd:MD_ScopeCode>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} </gmd:level>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gmd:levelDescription>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gmd:MD_ScopeDescription>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gmd:other>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gco:CharacterString>Geographic web service</gco:CharacterString>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} </gmd:other>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} </gmd:MD_ScopeDescription>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} </gmd:levelDescription>`

`</gmd:DQ_Scope>`

A similar rule applies to “hierarchyLevelName”, which must be provided
for any record that is not describing a dataset.

==== 3.4 No Format provided

ISO 19139 requires that a format is given, either within the
“distribution” section or the “distributor” section. INSPIRE & UK GEMINI
encoding guidance only expects the distribution section, as the place to
encode the Resource locator, which effectively renders distribution
format mandatory.

=== [#proc_errors]####4. Processing errors

These errors do not result in invalid records on an individual basis,
but may well result in the wrong records being available to the public.

==== 4.1 Non-compliant Web Accessible Folder (WAF)

The collection definition is very precise. Just because you can browse
to a page that appears to contain the records, it does not mean that the
system can collect from them. For example, the page may just contain
links to records that are elsewhere.

Similarly, collection differentiates between a single XML record at the
end of a URL, and a WAF.

==== 4.2 FileIdentifier

This is the identifier for a metadata record through time, so do ensure
that it remains the same when you update a record, and is different in
each record you create.

If you accidently change the identifier, the new record will not replace
the old one.

If you accidently provide two records with the same identifier, one will
replace the other.

==== 4.3 Metadata date

This is used to distinguish which of two records with the same
fileIdentifier the system will keep.

Even if the records are moved to a different server, if the
fileIdentifier and metadata date are the same, the harvester will not
collect the new files.

=== [#inspire_warnings]####5. European INSPIRE Geoportal errors & warnings

==== 5.1 Conformity statement missing

INSPIRE requires a ‘conformity’ statement, which can say that the
resource conforms, does not conform, or has not been evaluated against,
a specification. This is encoded with an ISO 19115 quality report. The
INSPIRE encoding guidelines say that “not evaluated” should be encoded
by leaving out the quality report. For this reason, GEMINI says that it
is conditional, “required if claiming conformance to INSPIRE”.

However, the INSPIRE Geoportal reports a validation issue if the element
is missing: “The metadata element "Conformity" is missing, empty or
incomplete but it is required”. This can be ignored.

*GEMINI Consolidation Note: The INSPIRE Encoding Guidelines were updated
in 2013; GEMINI 2.3 will be updated on this point.*

==== 5.2 Missing “coupled resource”

INSPIRE requires “Coupled resource” to be populated “where relevant”.
This effectively makes it mandatory for View & Download services, and
the INSPIRE Geoportal reports this as a validation issue. However, the
Geoportal also reports this issue for a Discovery service metadata
record, where coupled resource is not mandatory.

=== [#soft_errors]####6. “Soft” errors

==== 6.1 Empty strings

When first run, approximately half the rejections were down to this
error. UK Location decided to remove this check, so the records can be
harvested, although it is strongly recommended that this structure is
avoided.

ISO 19139 clause A.2.1 states “a property element following the default
XCPT pattern is designed to have content (by-value) or attributes
(by-reference or NULL with reason).” In context, this states that (with
very few exceptions) no metadata element shall be entirely empty: it
will either have (valid) content, or it will have a gco:nilReason
attribute stating why the content is absent. If the element is optional,
it shall be entirely absent from the XML document, not “present but
empty”.

The most common examples were structures like:

`<gmd:phone>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gmd:CI_Telephone/>`

`</gmd:phone>`

(in this case, as gmd:phone is optional, it should be entirely missing)

and

`<gmd:administrativeArea gco:nilReason="missing">`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gco:CharacterString/>`

`</gmd:administrativeArea>`

Examples of valid structures are:

`<gmd:administrativeArea gco:nilReason="missing"/>`

(although again, it would be equally valid to leave the element out
entirely)

`<gmd:deliveryPoint>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gco:CharacterString>Explorer House, Adanac Drive</gco:CharacterString>`

`</gmd:deliveryPoint>`

==== 6.2 Short relative URLs

The issues discussed here have just been noted whilst browsing the
records in data.gov.uk

Quite a lot of records use the ISO 19115 element “browseGraphic”, which
could usefully provide a quick visualisation of the dataset. However,
mostly these are populated with a local path, which is then impossible
to use once the dataset is harvested to any other location – even if it
did work in the data publisher’s original location. For example:

`<gmd:MD_BrowseGraphic>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gmd:fileName>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} <gco:CharacterString>Council_Housing_s.png</gco:CharacterString>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} </gmd:fileName>`

`{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp}{nbsp} …`

`</gmd:MD_BrowseGraphic>`

==== 6.3 Incorrect code list URL

The INSPIRE encoding guidance, and therefore earlier versions of the
GEMINI Encoding Guidance had a minor spelling (capitalisation) mistake
in the path for the code list dictionary. This is used a number of times
in most records.

`<gmd:CI_OnLineFunctionCode codeList="http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/ISO_19139_Schemas/resources/Codelist/gmxCodelists.xml#CI_OnLineFunctionCode" codeListValue="information">information</gmd:CI_OnLineFunctionCode>`

Should be

`<gmd:CI_OnLineFunctionCode codeList="http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/ISO_19139_Schemas/resources/codelist/gmxCodelists.xml#CI_OnLineFunctionCode" codeListValue="information">information</gmd:CI_OnLineFunctionCode>`

(a lower case ‘c’ in the first occurrence of ‘codelist’ within the URL)

*GEMINI Consolidation Note: The INSPIRE Encoding Guidelines have been
updated to correct this, in 2016.*

=== [#winner]####7. And the winner?

This table, for interest, gives the approximate error rate for each of
the above errors, in the sample tested in late 2012. This does not
include those soft errors only found by inspection.

[cols=",",]
|===
|*Error* |*Proportion*
|Empty strings |50%
|No level description |25%
|No format |24%
|_Four other errors, one occurrence each_ |
|===

_{nbsp}Last updated: August 2018_

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/[image:https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png[Creative
Commons Licence]] +
This work is licensed under
a{nbsp}http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/[Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License]