docs/partials/resourcelocator.asciidoc, before:

== Resource locator
include::includes/partials-attributes.adoc[]
[#19]

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",]
|===
|UK GEMINI id |19

|Definition |Location (address) for online access using a Uniform
Resource Locator (URL) address or similar addressing scheme

|Purpose and meaning |The purpose of this element is to point to where
the dataset, or dataset series may be directly accessed online +
OR, if no direct access is available, to an online resource providing
more information about accessing the dataset or dataset series.

|Obligation |Conditional - Must be supplied when online access is
available

|Occurrence |Multiple

|Data type |CharacterString

|Domain |Valid URL
# tag::dataset[]
|Guidance a|
. Identify whether the resource may be accessed.
. Determine the location of the resource (may be a URL).
. The URL of a DOI landing page should be given as a Resource locator
with a CI_OnlineFunctionCode value of "information".
. If no online access for the dataset or dataset series is available,
but there is a publicly available online resource providing additional
information about how to access the dataset of dataset series being
described, the URL pointing to this shall be given instead.
. Although not mandatory, the following ISO 19115 sub-elements should be
included, for best results with data.gov.uk:
* function (if provided, the gmd:CI_OnLineFunctionCode element should
point to one of the values of the ISO 19139 code list
CI_OnLineFunctionCode)
* name (this appears on the data.gov.uk site)
* description (data.gov.uk uses this if no 'name' provided)

|Comment a|
The URL provided as the value of the gmd:linkage element should point to
one of following type of resources:

* direct access for downloading the described dataset
* a service metadata (capabilities) document of a Spatial Data Service
used for providing this dataset
* a service WSDL document of a Spatial Data Service used for providing
this data set
* a client application that directly accesses the described dataset
* a web page with further instructions for accessing the described
dataset

|Examples |A DOI landing page:
http://doi.org/10.5285/1e7d5e08-9e24-471b-ae37-49b477f695e3

|Revision date |July 2009
# end::dataset[]
# tag::service[]
|Guidance a|
. Specify a valid URL to the service.
. If no online access for the service is available, but there is a
publicly available online resource providing additional information
about accessing the described service, the URL pointing to this resource
shall be given instead.
. Conditionally (required for invocable spatial data services otherwise
optional) a description should be provided
* For an invocable spatial data service, the gmd:linkage/gmd:description
child element gmd:CI_OnlineResource shall contain a gmx:Anchor element
pointing to the value "accessPoint" of the code list
OnLineDescriptionCode in the INSPIRE Registry
. Although not mandatory, the following ISO 19115 sub-elements should be
included, for best results with data.gov.uk:
.. function
.. name (this appears on the data.gov.uk site)
. In relation to online INSPIRE network services, special guidance
applies (see
link:component/content/article?id=1054#data_servce_linking['Data and
Service Linking']).
* Identify whether the resource may be accessed.
* Determine the location of the resource (may be a URL).
. For an invocable spatial data service the gmd:CI_OnLineFunctionCode
element should point to value "information"

|Comment a|
The URL provided as the value of the gmd:linkage element should point to
one of following type of resources:

* a service metadata (capabilities) document of the described Spatial
Data Service
* a service WSDL document of the described Spatial Data Service
* a web page with further instructions for accessing the described
service

|Examples |A Web Map Service (WMS) capabilities document would be given
like: +
http://myserver/INSPIREWM/MapServer/WMSServer?service=WMS&request=GetCapabilities&

|Revision date |July 2009
# end::service[]
|===

.Corresponding element in other standards...
[%collapsible]
====
|===
|Standard |Name |Comparison

|INSPIRE Metadata |Resource locator |Equivalent

|ISO 19115:2003 |MD_Distribution > MD_DigitalTransferOptions.online >
CI_OnlineResource.linkage |Equivalent

|ISO 19139:2007
|/gmd:MD_Metadata/gmd:distributionInfo/gmd:MD_Distribution/gmd:transferOptions/gmd:MD_DigitalTransferOptions/gmd:onLine/gmd:CI_OnlineResource/gmd:linkage
|Equivalent
|===
====

.Change history...
[%collapsible]
====
GEMINI 1 to 2.0: Modification of Online resource
====

.Encoding guidelines...
[%collapsible]
====
[cols="a,a"]
|===
|Guidelines
|
# tag::dataset[]
. The two examples illustrate different uses of Resource locator.
Example one gives direct access to the dataset. Example two gives the
location of further information about ordering the dataset. ISO 19115
and the ISO 19139 encoding provides a means of indicating the function
of the online resource using the CI_OnLineFunctionCode code list. Two
values from this code list provide a means of discriminating between a
URL that is provided for information (code list value of 'information')
and a URL that is the address used for downloading (code list value of
'download') the data.
. The gmd:transferOptions XML element of gmd:MD_Distribution is used to
encode a URL. Note that it is necessary to encode distribution format
information in all cases. If the URL that is provided is the location of
a point of contact then the distribution format is moot. However, the
distribution format property is required by an ISO 19115 constraint. In
this case the INSPIRE guidelines show the encoding using gmd:MD_Format.
Note that the element gmd:MD_Distribution must have the element
gmd:distributionFormat as its first child according to a constraint in
ISO 19115. Format information may not always be known in which case the
encoding of the element gmd:MD_Format shown in Example One shall be
used, following the
https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/documents/inspire-metadata-implementing-rules-technical-guidelines-based-en-iso-19115-and-en-iso-1[INSPIRE
guidance] link:component/content/article?id=1047[[9]]. If the format and
version values are known, then they should be given (see link:#21[Data
format]).
|Example one, showing only required linkage content (for a dataset)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/dataset-resourcelocator-required.xml[]
----
| Example two - including name, description, and indication of function
(for a dataset ordering page)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/dataset-resourcelocator-information.xml[]
----
|===
# end::dataset[]
# tag::service[]
|Guidelines
|
. In the examples, the URLs provided are for OGC GetCapabilities
requests.
. The gmd:transferOptions XML element of gmd:MD_Distribution is used to
encode a URL. Note that it is necessary to encode distribution format
information in all cases. If the URL that is provided is the location of
a point of contact then the distribution format is moot. However, the
distribution format property is required by an ISO 19115 constraint. In
this case the INSPIRE guidelines show the encoding using gmd:MD_Format.
Note that the element gmd:MD_Distribution must have the element
gmd:distributionFormat as its first child according to a constraint in
ISO 19115. Format information may not always be known in which case the
encoding of the element gmd:MD_Format shown in Example One shall be
used, following the
https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/documents/inspire-metadata-implementing-rules-technical-guidelines-based-en-iso-19115-and-en-iso-1[INSPIRE
guidance] link:component/content/article?id=1047[[9]]. If the format and
version values are known, then they should be given (see link:#21[Data
format]).
. GEMINI2 allows for a URL which is a link to a point of contact where
more information is available or where the dataset can be downloaded.
. ISO 19115 and the ISO 19139 encoding provides a means of indicating
the function of the online resource by means of the
CI_OnLineFunctionCode code list. Two values from this code list provide
a means of discriminating between a URL that is provided for information
(code list value of 'information') and a URL that is the address used
for downloading (code list value of 'download') the data.
. The INSPIRE
link:inspire.ec.europa.eu/metadata-codelist/OnLineDescriptionCode[OnLineDescriptionCode]
provides a way of further distinguishing between access point URLs and
end point URLs. Access points call an operation directly; end points
list operations and their access points.
. Note that the GetCapabilities URL contains an entity reference
(sometimes known as an escape sequence) for the ampersand character.
When an XML parser reads &amp; it replaces the sequence with &. When
writing XML, XML aware software will escape characters automatically but
text editing software will not. The ampersand character alone in XML is
interpreted as beginning an entity or character reference. XML defines
five entity references:
* &lt; - The character <
* &amp; - The character &
* &gt; - The character >
* &quot; - The character "
* &apos; - The character '
|Example one, showing only required linkage content (for a WMS)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/service-resourcelocator-required.xml[]
----
| Example Two - including name, description, and indication of function
(for a WMS)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/service-resourcelocator-function-wms.xml[]
----
|Example Three - including name, description, and indication of function
(for a WCS)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/service-resourcelocator-function-wcs.xml[]
----
|Example Four - including name, description, and indication of function
(for an invocable spatial data service)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/service-resourcelocator-function-invocable.xml[]
----
|===
# end::service[]
====

.Metadata errors observed...
[%collapsible]
====
|===
|Errors observed a|
In a Resource Locator, a WMS service that does not end in an ampersand
or question mark is incorrect, for example: +

....
<gmd:linkage>
  <gmd:URL>https://map.bgs.ac.uk/ArcGIS/services/BGS_Detailed_Geology/MapServer/WMSServer</gmd:URL>
</gmd:linkage>
....

Should be: +

....
<gmd:linkage>
  <gmd:URL>https://map.bgs.ac.uk/ArcGIS/services/BGS_Detailed_Geology/MapServer/WMSServer?service=WMS&request=GetCapabilities&</gmd:URL>
</gmd:linkage>
....

or: +

....
<gmd:linkage>
  <gmd:URL>https://map.bgs.ac.uk/ArcGIS/services/BGS_Detailed_Geology/MapServer/WMSServer?</gmd:URL>
</gmd:linkage>
....

 +
Defra metadata audit, October 2015: Very few records included direct
links to WMS end points.

|===
====

Commit message:

Add guidance on selecting appropriate OnLineFunctionCode
As per https://github.com/agiorguk/gemini/issues/53

docs/partials/resourcelocator.asciidoc, after:

== Resource locator
include::includes/partials-attributes.adoc[]
[#19]

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",]
|===
|UK GEMINI id |19

|Definition |Location (address) for online access using a Uniform
Resource Locator (URL) address or similar addressing scheme

|Purpose and meaning |The purpose of this element is to point to where
the dataset, or dataset series may be directly accessed online +
OR, if no direct access is available, to an online resource providing
more information about accessing the dataset or dataset series.

|Obligation |Conditional - Must be supplied when online access is
available

|Occurrence |Multiple

|Data type |CharacterString

|Domain |Valid URL
# tag::dataset[]
|Guidance a|
. Identify whether the resource may be accessed.
. Determine the location of the resource (may be a URL).
. The URL of a DOI landing page should be given as a Resource locator
with a CI_OnlineFunctionCode value of "information".
. If no online access for the dataset or dataset series is available,
but there is a publicly available online resource providing additional
information about how to access the dataset of dataset series being
described, the URL pointing to this shall be given instead.
. Although not mandatory, the following ISO 19115 sub-elements should be
included, for best results with data.gov.uk:
* function (if provided, the gmd:CI_OnLineFunctionCode element should
point to one of the values of the ISO 19139 code list
CI_OnLineFunctionCode)
* name (this appears on the data.gov.uk site)
* description (data.gov.uk uses this if no 'name' provided)
. Guidance on selecting appropriate OnLineFunctionCode value for function sub-element.
!===
!OnLineFunctionCode !	Meaning !	Example
!download	! online instructions for transferring data from one storage device or system to another ! WFS Direct URL to file
!information ! online information about the resource ! WMS Product page
!offlineAccess ! online instructions for requesting the resource from the provider ! web page containing ordering information
!order ! online order process for obtaining the resource ! Product ordering page
!search ! online search interface for seeking out information about the resource ! distributors web site search page	
!===
|Comment a|
The URL provided as the value of the gmd:linkage element should point to
one of following type of resources:

* direct access for downloading the described dataset
* a service metadata (capabilities) document of a Spatial Data Service
used for providing this dataset
* a service WSDL document of a Spatial Data Service used for providing
this data set
* a client application that directly accesses the described dataset
* a web page with further instructions for accessing the described
dataset

|Examples |A DOI landing page:
http://doi.org/10.5285/1e7d5e08-9e24-471b-ae37-49b477f695e3

|Revision date |July 2009
# end::dataset[]
# tag::service[]
|Guidance a|
. Specify a valid URL to the service.
. If no online access for the service is available, but there is a
publicly available online resource providing additional information
about accessing the described service, the URL pointing to this resource
shall be given instead.
. Conditionally (required for invocable spatial data services otherwise
optional) a description should be provided
* For an invocable spatial data service, the gmd:linkage/gmd:description
child element gmd:CI_OnlineResource shall contain a gmx:Anchor element
pointing to the value "accessPoint" of the code list
OnLineDescriptionCode in the INSPIRE Registry
. Although not mandatory, the following ISO 19115 sub-elements should be
included, for best results with data.gov.uk:
.. function
.. name (this appears on the data.gov.uk site)
. In relation to online INSPIRE network services, special guidance
applies (see
link:component/content/article?id=1054#data_servce_linking['Data and
Service Linking']).
* Identify whether the resource may be accessed.
* Determine the location of the resource (may be a URL).
. For an invocable spatial data service the gmd:CI_OnLineFunctionCode
element should point to value "information"

|Comment a|
The URL provided as the value of the gmd:linkage element should point to
one of following type of resources:

* a service metadata (capabilities) document of the described Spatial
Data Service
* a service WSDL document of the described Spatial Data Service
* a web page with further instructions for accessing the described
service

|Examples |A Web Map Service (WMS) capabilities document would be given
like: +
http://myserver/INSPIREWM/MapServer/WMSServer?service=WMS&request=GetCapabilities&

|Revision date |July 2009
# end::service[]
|===

.Corresponding element in other standards...
[%collapsible]
====
|===
|Standard |Name |Comparison

|INSPIRE Metadata |Resource locator |Equivalent

|ISO 19115:2003 |MD_Distribution > MD_DigitalTransferOptions.online >
CI_OnlineResource.linkage |Equivalent

|ISO 19139:2007
|/gmd:MD_Metadata/gmd:distributionInfo/gmd:MD_Distribution/gmd:transferOptions/gmd:MD_DigitalTransferOptions/gmd:onLine/gmd:CI_OnlineResource/gmd:linkage
|Equivalent
|===
====

.Change history...
[%collapsible]
====
GEMINI 1 to 2.0: Modification of Online resource
====

.Encoding guidelines...
[%collapsible]
====
[cols="a,a"]
|===
|Guidelines
|
# tag::dataset[]
. The two examples illustrate different uses of Resource locator.
Example one gives direct access to the dataset. Example two gives the
location of further information about ordering the dataset. ISO 19115
and the ISO 19139 encoding provides a means of indicating the function
of the online resource using the CI_OnLineFunctionCode code list. Two
values from this code list provide a means of discriminating between a
URL that is provided for information (code list value of 'information')
and a URL that is the address used for downloading (code list value of
'download') the data.
. The gmd:transferOptions XML element of gmd:MD_Distribution is used to
encode a URL. Note that it is necessary to encode distribution format
information in all cases. If the URL that is provided is the location of
a point of contact then the distribution format is moot. However, the
distribution format property is required by an ISO 19115 constraint. In
this case the INSPIRE guidelines show the encoding using gmd:MD_Format.
Note that the element gmd:MD_Distribution must have the element
gmd:distributionFormat as its first child according to a constraint in
ISO 19115. Format information may not always be known in which case the
encoding of the element gmd:MD_Format shown in Example One shall be
used, following the
https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/documents/inspire-metadata-implementing-rules-technical-guidelines-based-en-iso-19115-and-en-iso-1[INSPIRE
guidance] link:component/content/article?id=1047[[9]]. If the format and
version values are known, then they should be given (see link:#21[Data
format]).
|Example one, showing only required linkage content (for a dataset)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/dataset-resourcelocator-required.xml[]
----
| Example two - including name, description, and indication of function
(for a dataset ordering page)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/dataset-resourcelocator-information.xml[]
----
|===
# end::dataset[]
# tag::service[]
|Guidelines
|
. In the examples, the URLs provided are for OGC GetCapabilities
requests.
. The gmd:transferOptions XML element of gmd:MD_Distribution is used to
encode a URL. Note that it is necessary to encode distribution format
information in all cases. If the URL that is provided is the location of
a point of contact then the distribution format is moot. However, the
distribution format property is required by an ISO 19115 constraint. In
this case the INSPIRE guidelines show the encoding using gmd:MD_Format.
Note that the element gmd:MD_Distribution must have the element
gmd:distributionFormat as its first child according to a constraint in
ISO 19115. Format information may not always be known in which case the
encoding of the element gmd:MD_Format shown in Example One shall be
used, following the
https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/documents/inspire-metadata-implementing-rules-technical-guidelines-based-en-iso-19115-and-en-iso-1[INSPIRE
guidance] link:component/content/article?id=1047[[9]]. If the format and
version values are known, then they should be given (see link:#21[Data
format]).
. GEMINI2 allows for a URL which is a link to a point of contact where
more information is available or where the dataset can be downloaded.
. ISO 19115 and the ISO 19139 encoding provides a means of indicating
the function of the online resource by means of the
CI_OnLineFunctionCode code list. Two values from this code list provide
a means of discriminating between a URL that is provided for information
(code list value of 'information') and a URL that is the address used
for downloading (code list value of 'download') the data.
. The INSPIRE
link:inspire.ec.europa.eu/metadata-codelist/OnLineDescriptionCode[OnLineDescriptionCode]
provides a way of further distinguishing between access point URLs and
end point URLs. Access points call an operation directly; end points
list operations and their access points.
. Note that the GetCapabilities URL contains an entity reference
(sometimes known as an escape sequence) for the ampersand character.
When an XML parser reads &amp; it replaces the sequence with &. When
writing XML, XML aware software will escape characters automatically but
text editing software will not. The ampersand character alone in XML is
interpreted as beginning an entity or character reference. XML defines
five entity references:
* &lt; - The character <
* &amp; - The character &
* &gt; - The character >
* &quot; - The character "
* &apos; - The character '
|Example one, showing only required linkage content (for a WMS)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/service-resourcelocator-required.xml[]
----
| Example Two - including name, description, and indication of function
(for a WMS)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/service-resourcelocator-function-wms.xml[]
----
|Example Three - including name, description, and indication of function
(for a WCS)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/service-resourcelocator-function-wcs.xml[]
----
|Example Four - including name, description, and indication of function
(for an invocable spatial data service)
|
[source,xml]
----
include::../snippets/service-resourcelocator-function-invocable.xml[]
----
|===
# end::service[]
====

.Metadata errors observed...
[%collapsible]
====
|===
|Errors observed a|
In a Resource Locator, a WMS service that does not end in an ampersand
or question mark is incorrect, for example: +

....
<gmd:linkage>
  <gmd:URL>https://map.bgs.ac.uk/ArcGIS/services/BGS_Detailed_Geology/MapServer/WMSServer</gmd:URL>
</gmd:linkage>
....

Should be: +

....
<gmd:linkage>
  <gmd:URL>https://map.bgs.ac.uk/ArcGIS/services/BGS_Detailed_Geology/MapServer/WMSServer?service=WMS&request=GetCapabilities&</gmd:URL>
</gmd:linkage>
....

or: +

....
<gmd:linkage>
  <gmd:URL>https://map.bgs.ac.uk/ArcGIS/services/BGS_Detailed_Geology/MapServer/WMSServer?</gmd:URL>
</gmd:linkage>
....

 +
Defra metadata audit, October 2015: Very few records included direct
links to WMS end points.

|===
====
