= Element Summary
include::./includes/attributes.asciidoc[]

Return
to{nbsp}link:1037-uk-gemini-introduction.html[GEMINI
2.3 home page]

[cols=",,,,,,",]
|===
|UK GEMINI id |Element name |Obligation |Number of occurrences |Dataset
and series |Service |Revision date

|1 |Title |Mandatory |Single |✓ |✓ |March 2019

|2 |Alternative title |Optional |Multiple |✓ |✓ |April 2020

|3 |Dataset language |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |n/a |September 2018

|4 |Abstract |Mandatory |Single |✓ |✓ |March 2019

|5 |Topic Category |Mandatory when the data resource is a dataset or
dataset series. Not applicable to services. |Multiple |✓ |n/a |March
2019

|6 |Keyword |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |May 2019

|7 |Temporal extent |Mandatory for datasets and dataset series |Multiple
|✓ |✓ |May 2018

|8 |Dataset reference date |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |March 2019

|10 |Lineage |Mandatory |Single |✓ |n/a |March 2019

|15 |Extent |Optional |Multiple |✓ |✓ |August 2010

|16 |Vertical extent information |Optional |Multiple |✓ |✓ |March 2019

|17 |Spatial reference system |At least one coordinate reference system
shall be given |Multiple |✓ |✓ |March 2019

|18 |Spatial resolution |Conditional - where a resolution distance can
be specified |Multiple |✓ |✓ |March 2019

|19 |Resource locator |Conditional - Must be supplied when online access
is available |Multiple |✓ |✓ |July 2009

|21 |Data format |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |n/a |March 2019

|23 |Responsible organisation |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |July 2009

|25 |Limitations on public access |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |January
2020

|26 |Use constraints |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |September 2018

|27 |Additional information |Optional |Single |✓ |n/a |October 2018

|30 |Metadata date* |Mandatory |Single |✓ |✓ |May 2018

|33 |Metadata language* |Mandatory |Single |✓ |✓ |September 2018

|35 |Metadata point of contact* |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |July 2009

|36 |Resource identifier |Mandatory for datasets and dataset series
|Multiple |✓ |n/a |May 2018

|37 |Spatial data service type |Mandatory |Single |n/a |✓ |July 2009

|38 |Coupled resource |Conditional - mandatory for View and Download
services, optional for other service types. |Multiple |n/a |✓ |March
2019

|39 |Resource type* |Mandatory |Single |✓ |✓ |July 2009

|41 |Conformity |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |April 2020

|43 |Equivalent scale |Optional |Multiple |✓ |✓ |July 2009

|44 |Bounding box |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |December 2012

|45 |File Identifier* |Mandatory |Single |✓ |✓ |March 2019

|47 |Hierarchy level name* |Conditional, required when Resource type
(ISO hierarchyLevel) is not "dataset". |Single |✓ |✓ |April 2020

|48 |Quality scope |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |✓ |March 2019

|49 |Parent identifier* |Optional |Single |✓ |✓ |May 2018

|50 |Spatial representation type |Mandatory |Multiple |✓ |n/a |May 2018

|51 |Character encoding |Conditional (mandatory if an encoding is used
that is not based on UTF-8, otherwise optional) |Multiple |✓ |n/a |May
2018

|52 |Data quality |Conditional: Topological consistency report is
mandatory if the dataset includes types from the INSPIRE Generic Network
Model and does not assure centerline topology (connectivity of
centrelines) for the network, otherwise optional |Multiple |✓ |n/a |May
2018

|53 |Maintenance information |Optional |Single |✓ |n/a |April 2020

|54 |Metadata standard name* |Optional |Single |✓ |✓ |January 2020

|55 |Metadata standard version* |Optional |Single |✓ |✓ |January 2020
|===

* indicates metadata on metadata

Note. Element numbers 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 20, 22, 28, 29, 31, 32, 40 and
42 have been omitted because they were used to identify elements that
have now been deleted from the Standard, and have not been reallocated
to avoid confusion.

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/[image:https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png[Creative Commons Licence]] +
This work is licensed under a{nbsp}http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/[Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License]

